Memory Management 
Laboratory 4 
Duration: 3 weeks 
This assignment will help us learn about how page table contents are maintained, and how 
different page replacement policies work. 
in 
the 
You will need to develop a simulator of a Virtual Memory Manager in C++. The simulator must 
take 
following 
command 
line 
arguments: 
<page-size> 
<number-of-memory-frames> <replacement-policy> <allocation-policy> 
<path-to-memory-trace-file>. 
Experiment with: 
● Different page sizes between 64 B and 64 KB 
● Different number of memory frames between 4 and 64 K 
● 4 replacement policies: Optimal, FIFO, LRU, Random 
● 2 allocation policies: Global and Local. In the case of Local, you can follow the “equal 
allocation” policy. 
● 2 different memory trace files available here: one is a small trace (for testing and 
debugging) and the other is a longer one (for analysis). These are collected from 4 
different real world applications. Assume that these 4 processes are running 
simultaneously, all of them making accesses to the memory. Each line in the trace file 
corresponds to one access. The lines are listed in the order accessed by the processes. 
The format of one line is <process id>,<virtual address>. Assume a 64-bit 
system. Tip: use uint64 type for addresses in your code (reference (note that the 
documentation varies with different versions of C++ – use the “Standard Revision” 
dropdown in the top-right of the page)). 
Study the different combinations of the above parameters in terms of the number of page faults. 
Implementation suggestions: 
● Design a PageTable data structure, and implement it as a class. Create 4 objects of this 
data structure, one for each process. 
● Design a FrameStatus data structure, and implement it as a class. 
● For every access mentioned in the file, search for the virtual address to physical address 
mapping in the corresponding page table. If not found, increment the page fault counter 
(maintain a global page fault counter, as well as per-process page fault counters). Then 
add the mapping to the page table by finding a free frame if available, or by evicting a 
frame based on the replacement policy being followed. 
Submission: 
● Source code with suitable makefiles 
● Report containing observations in the form of graphs and their analyses. 
